---
layout: post
title: "Some ramblings on security"
date: 2017-10-31 14:14:31 -0500
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Introclusion.
------------

Poster-filled walls and corridors have been a staple of colleges for a long
while. Anyone who has walked through a college campus has noticed them, maybe
even was overwhelmed by the sheer volume that thin pieces of paper can take up
in a hallway. And anyone who has walked through those places a lot of times has
inevitably went numb to that effect. [Information overload](http://www.economist.com/node/18895468) is the term
commonly used for this effect <!--more-->, and it has been interfering so much that almost
all industries that are focused on making products that can do everything, such
as computers and phones, have now spawned side projects that are focused on
making products that can only do [one thing](http://getfreewrite.com).

So amidst the bombardment of social justice posters, sign-ups for student
worker's unions, parties, etc, it's easy to miss the humble posters about the
important stuff. This happened to me, a single small poster about our IT
department arranging a talk about cybersecurity and staying safe on the web in
general. After contacting the IT department, I found out that the talk had very
low attendance. Which is a shame, because I think it's a topic that should be
universally understood, possibly even taught in schools. Why did people not
attend? Was it because they didn't see the poster? Or because they don't care
enough about keeping their accounts secured? Is it both?

Rationalization vs Security.
---------------------------

I spent most of my life using the same passphrase for every single one of my
accounts. I simply didn't know that having a strong password was important, all
I knew was that to make an account I had to fill in that little box with the
\*\*\*\*\*\*\*s, and I should keep it secret. Makes sense, right? I simply
didn't bother coming up with a new one, since, I didn't need more than one
password.

The first thing that attempted to hinder my onslaught of password reuse was
those pesky password rules. What do they know? I choose my own password, Mr.
Form! You can't make me change my password just for you. Oh wait, you're not
using JavaScript for form validation, ok, ok, well played, here's the same
password with a couple of numbers on it. So I made a ton of variations on the
same password. Not as bad, but still horrible. But what did I know? I was able
to do it, it was the path of least resistance, so I took it.

It took me 5 years of online life until I got to use a password manager. It was
a slow burn, some info from here, some advice from there. I did not even have a
huge "holy shit" moment that caused me to rush and secure my accounts. It was
just a decision I made because a lot of my colleagues suggested it was good, I
still barely grasped the importance of a weak link in my security compromising
my whole identity.

Would better security education help this? Would we see less
[hunter2](http://www.bash.org/?244321) and more Snowdens hiding under a blanket
everytime they enter a password? It's hard to say. What I know for sure though
is that it shouldn't have needed a CS education to get me to secure my accounts.

I accept.
--------

In my mind, security and privacy are so tightly intertwined that they are one
and the same. You should not be very careful about your account security without
also reading privacy policies and documents of the services you use. The storage
of even your meta-data by a company makes it so that you're not in control of
how well the data is secured, and how private it is kept.

So why had I not read Google's privacy policy until 2015? About 3 years of
having a Google account that represented me to the Whole Wide World, and roughly
a lifetime of using their services, but I did not know or care about what all
that data of me is doing up there. It's not like Google hid it from me either,
there were frequent pop-ups that informed me that the Google privacy statement
has been updated, and that I should check it out. I dismissed them all.

I think part of it roots back to young me mindlessly speedrunning through old
Windows install wizards, accepting the terms of agreement without reading a
sentence. Well, to my credit, I didn't even know English back then, so you can't
really blame me. But getting into high school and learning English didn't stop
me from checking that box without even thinking about it. To be honest, terms of
agreement are so convoluted that I can barely follow them now. Privacy policies
on the other hand are actually helpful, and many times well formatted, user
friendly. Most (ethical) services do inform you that the way your private
information is being handled has changed, and strongly recommended reading over
the policy changes.

So there must be something more to it.

Endtroduction.
-------------

This ties back into the rationalization vs security concept. It's easy to let
yourself get lost in all the services that you've been using all your life, and
to push your security and privacy to the back of your mind. Even after getting
educated about privacy, it's hard to face the reality of what your data has been
used for for so long.

In a world of technology, young users start using email services, social media,
and many other online accounts that are so essential that we are very eager to
give up our privacy. Furthermore, we start owning accounts that must be secured
way before we are educated with any proper security practices. Even when there
are attempts to educate people, or get them to start inquiring privacy and
security on their own, it's easy to get distracted, push it back, and stop
yourself from actually using the web safely and securely for you and your
information. Much like the posters on my college's walls, the plethora of other
information drown out the important, hard truths that people should be required
to know before they use the web.

Points can be made for security other than the password type. Encrypted email is
fairly easy to setup nowadays, but only a small fraction of email users actually
take advantage of it. Two-factor authentication is growing [more
popular](https://www.drupal.org/project/usage/tfa), yet people are still
surprised when they see me enter a password and then use my phone to log into
any account on my computer. No matter what happens, the casual users will far
outweigh the power users. But we sould raise the bar for casual users to be far
more secure in their online lives.
